
=== 2512.07087_equational_theories_project.pdf ===
The Equational Theories Project: Advancing Collaborative Mathematical
Research at Scale
Matthew Bolan, Joachim Breitner, Jose Brox, Nicholas Carlini, Mario Carneiro, Floris van Doorn, Martin
Dvorak, Andrés Goens, Aaron Hill, Harald Husum, Hernán Ibarra Mejia, Zoltan A. Kocsis, Bruno Le
Floch, Amir Livne Bar-on, Lorenzo Luccioli, Douglas McNeil, Alex Meiburg, Pietro Monticone, Pace P.
Nielsen, Emmanuel Osalotioman Osazuwa, Giovanni Paolini, Marco Petracci, Bernhard Reinke, David
Renshaw, Marcus Rossel, Cody Roux, Jérémy Scanvic, Shreyas Srinivas, Anand Rao Tadipatri, Terence
Tao, Vlad Tsyrklevich, Fernando Vaquerizo-Villar, Daniel Weber, Fan Zheng
Abstract.We report on theEquational Theories Project(ETP), an online collaborative
pilot project to explore new ways to collaborate in mathematics with machine assistance.
The project successfully determined all22 028 942edges of the implication graph between
the4694simplest equational laws on magmas, by a combination of human-generated and
automated proofs, all validated by the formal proof assistant languageLean. As a result of
this project, several new constructions of magmas satisfying specific laws were discovered,
and several auxiliary questions were also addressed, such as the effect of restricting attention
to finite magmas.
Contents
1. Introduction 2
2. Notation and mathematical foundations 9
3. Formal foundations 10
4. Project management 12
5. Counterexample constructions 20
6. Syntactic arguments 33
7. Proof automation 39
8. Implications for finite magmas 52
9. Spectrum of equational laws 52
10. Higman–Neumann laws 54
11. AI and Machine Learning contributions 57
12. User Interfaces 59
13. Data management 60
14. Conclusions and future directions 61
Acknowledgments 65
Appendix A. Numbering system 65
Appendix B. Author contributions 69
References 71
Date: December 2025.
1
arXiv:2512.07087v2  [math.RA]  16 Dec 2025
2 EQUATIONAL THEORIES PROJECT CONTRIBUTORS
1.Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to report on theEquational Theories Project(ETP)1, a pilot
project launched [65] in September 2024 to explore new ways to collaboratively work on
mathematical research projects using machine assistance. The project goal, in the area of
universal algebra, was selected2 to be particularly amenable to crowdsourced and computer-
assisted techniques, while still being of mathematical research interest.
The project achieved its primary goal on 14 April 2025, when the4694×(4694−1) =
22 028 942implications between the test set of4694equational laws were completely deter-
mined, with proofs or refutations formalized inLean. This required coordinating the efforts
of a large number of participants contributing both human-written formalizations and au-
tomatically generated proofs from various computer tools. In this paper, we report on both
the scientific outcomes of the project, as well as the organizational issues that came up with
organizing a mathematical project of this scale.
1.1.Magmas and equational laws.In order to describe the mathematical goals of the
ETP, we need some notation. AmagmaM= (M,⋄)is a setM(known as thecarrier)
together with a binary operation⋄:M×M→M. Anequational lawfor a magma, orlaw
for short, is an identity involving⋄and some formal indeterminates, which we will typically
denote using the Roman lettersx,y,z,w,u,v, as well as the formal equality symbol≃in
place of the equality symbol=to emphasize the formal nature of the law. IfMis finite, we
refer to its cardinality as thesizeof the magmaM.
Anequational theoryis a collection of equational laws; in this paper we will primarily be

=== 2102.05547_learning_equational_theorem_proving.pdf ===
LEARNING EQUATIONAL THEOREM PROVING
Jelle Piepenbrock∗† Tom Heskes∗ Mikoláš Janota† Josef Urban†
February 11, 2021
ABSTRACT
We develop Stratiﬁed Shortest Solution Imitation Learning (3SIL) to learn equational theorem
proving in a deep reinforcement learning (RL) setting. The self-trained models achieve state-of-the-
art performance in proving problems generated by one of the top open conjectures in quasigroup
theory, the Abelian Inner Mapping (AIM) Conjecture. To develop the methods, we ﬁrst use two
simpler arithmetic rewriting tasks that share tree-structured proof states and sparse rewards with the
AIM problems. On these tasks, 3SIL is shown to signiﬁcantly outperform several established RL and
imitation learning methods. The ﬁnal system is then evaluated in a standalone and cooperative mode
on the AIM problems. The standalone 3SIL-trained system proves in 60 seconds more theorems
(70.2%) than the complex, hand-engineered Waldmeister system (65.5%). In the cooperative mode,
the ﬁnal system is combined with theProver9 system, proving in 2 seconds what standalone Prover9
proves in 60 seconds.
1 Introduction
Machine learning (ML) has recently proven its worth in many separate ﬁelds. From computer vision [1], to speech
recognition [2] to game playing [3, 4, 5] using reinforcement learning (RL), machine learning has made immense
progress. In automated mathematics and automated theorem proving, machine learning has also recently achieved some
encouraging results.
Learned models have been used in saturation-based theorem provers to improve given clause selection [6], to synthesize
functions in higher-order logic [7] and to guide a connection-tableau prover using reinforcement learning [8]. There
have also been efforts to use reinforcement learning in interactive theorem proving [9, 10].
In general, the knowledge base of mathematics and the complexity of mathematical proofs will grow in the future.
The need for proof checking and higher computer mathematics performance will therefore increase. Simultaneously,
the complexity of software and the need for formal veriﬁcation to prevent failure modes have also been growing [11].
Automated theorem proving and mathematics will beneﬁt from advanced ML integration. One of the mathematical
subﬁelds where automated theorem provers are heavily used is the ﬁeld of quasigroup and loop theory [12]. A
quasigroup is similar to a group, but it does not guarantee associativity. A loop is a quasigroup with an identity element.
In this paper, we present Stratiﬁed Shortest Solution Imitation Learning (3SIL), a new machine learning approach that
can learn equational theorem proving. We compare our 3SIL algorithm on two simpler arithmetic tasks with established
reinforcement learning baselines and then apply it on theorems generated in the context of the Abelian Inner Mapping
(AIM) Conjecture for loops [13] using the AIMLEAP proof environment [14].
The structure of the paper is as follows. Sections 2 and 3 describe the datasets used for the arithmetic and AIM
conjecture tasks respectively. The RL methods used as baselines and the proposed 3SIL method are discussed in Section
4. Afterwards, Section 5 describes the tree neural network models used to process the mathematical expressions. Section
6 focuses on the experiments performed on the arithmetic tasks and comparison with RL methods. Our results on the
AIM conjecture dataset and comparison with state-of-the-art automated theorem provers are in Section 7. Discussion
and conclusions are in Sections 8 and 9. Our contributions are the following.
∗Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands
†Czech Technical University Prague, Czech Republic
arXiv:2102.05547v1  [cs.LG]  10 Feb 2021
FEBRUARY 11, 2021
1. We release a Python reinforcement learning environment for arithmetic rewriting tasks.
2. We propose 3SIL, stratiﬁed shortest solution imitation learning, a method that outperforms established
reinforcement learning methods on the arithmetic rewriting tasks in our environments.
3. We use 3SIL to learn equational theorem proving in the AIMLEAP proof environment. The system performs
competitively with established equational theorem provers, that contain many hours of work and lines of code.
This is shown on a signiﬁcant mathematical domain: the theory surrounding the open AIM conjecture, one of
the top open problems in quasigroup theory.
4. We combine the learned system with an existing state-of-the-art automated theorem prover. The combined
system outperforms the original prover, even with a smaller time limit.
2 Arithmetic Tasks
To develop a method that can solve equational theorem proving problems, we considered two simpler arithmetic tasks,
which also have a tree-structured input and a sparse reward structure: Robinson arithmetic and polynomial arithmetic.
In both cases, the task is to normalize a mathematical expression to one speciﬁc form. These two tasks are implemented
as Python RL environments, which we make available.
The learning environments incorporate two existing datasets. For the Robinson arithmetic normalization task, we use
a dataset that was constructed for reinforcement learning experiments in the interactive theorem prover HOL4 [15].
For the polynomial normalization task, we employ a dataset introduced for experiments in symbolic rewriting using

=== 2601.20759_latent_space_equational_theories.pdf ===
The latent space of equational theories
Luis Berlioz
Universidad Nacional
Autónoma de Honduras
luis.berlioz@unah.edu.hm
Paul-André Melliès
Université Paris Cité
CNRS, INRIA
mellies@irif.fr
Abstract
Building on the collaborative Equational The-
ories project initiated by Terence Tao fifteen
months ago, and combining it with ideas com-
ing from machine learning and finite model
theory, we construct alatent space of equa-
tional theorieswhere each equational theory is
located at a specific location, determined by its
statistical behavior with respect to a large sam-
ple of finite magmas. This experiment enables
us to observe for the first time how reasoning
flows and produces surprisingly oriented and
well-structured chains of logical implications
in the latent space of equational theories.
Two things fill the mind with ever new and in-
creasing admiration and awe, the more often and
steadily we reflect upon them: the starry heavens
above me and the moral law within me.
Immanuel Kant, Critique of Practical Reason.
1 Introduction
This work draws on the recent collaborative project
Equational Theories (ET project) initiated by Ter-
ence Tao about fifteen months ago (Sept. 2024). In
this innovative mathematical experiment, a large
community of thirty-three authors exchanging on
the Lean Zulip were able to describeexhaustively
in only a few weeks the full implication pre-
order (G,⇒) between 4694 basic equational theo-
ries on magmas, see (Bolan et al., 2024) for details.
Taking inspiration from the ET project and using
the concept ofStone pairingoriginating from fi-
nite model theory (Nešetˇril and Ossona de Mendez,
2020), we experiment with the idea that mathemat-
ical concepts (in this case, equational theories) can
be located asvertices in a latent space, and then
observed and mapped in the same way as constel-
lations of stars in the sky.
Once the latent space of equational theories has
been defined and constructed, we derive anim-
plication graph (G,⇝) from the full implication
preorder (G,⇒) made available online by the ET
project. This allows us to observe thatreasoning
flows in a surprisingly well-organized and oriented
wayin the latent space of equational theories.
Despite its simple technical and conceptual de-
sign, this empirical study at the crossroad of math-
ematical logic and machine learning reveals the
existence of a rich and well-organisedlatent space
of equational theories and reasoning flowsat the
heart of universal algebra. We believe that the
discovery of this emerging piece of mathematical

=== 2603.06849_learning_abstractions_equational_theorem_proving.pdf ===
Twitch: Learning Abstractions for Equational
Theorem Proving
Guy Axelrod 1,2[0000−0002−1752−8069], Moa Johansson 1,2[0000−0002−1097−8278],
and Nicholas Smallbone 1,2[0000−0003−2880−6121]
1 Chalmers University, of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden
2 University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
{guya,jomoa,nicsma}@chalmers.se
Abstract. Several successful strategies in automated reasoning rely on
human-supplied guidance about which term or clause shapes are inter-
esting. In this paper we aim to discover interesting term shapes auto-
matically. Speciﬁcally, we discover abstractions: term patterns that oc-
cur over and over again in relevant proofs. We present our tool Twitch
which discovers abstractions with the help of Stitch, a tool originally
developed for discovering reusable library functions in program synthesis
tasks. Twitch can produce abstractions in two ways: (1) from a partial,
failed proof of a conjecture; (2) from successful proofs of other theorems
in the same domain. We have also extended Twee, an equational theo-
rem prover, to use these abstractions. We evaluate Twitch on a set of
unit equality (UEQ) problems from TPTP, and show that it can prove
12 rating-1 problems as well as yielding signiﬁcant speed-ups on many
other problems.
Keywords: automated theorem proving · equational theorem proving
· completion· abstraction learning · proof-guided search
1 Introduction
Automated theorem provers must navigate a massive search space, choosing the
useful inferences and discarding the useless ones. For example, a proof in Twee
[17] may consider hundreds of millions of critical pairs, selecting some tens of
thousands as active rewrite rules, of which perhaps a few hundred are used in
the ﬁnal proof. Thus, it is essential to identify which critical pairs are interesting
– but Twee’s heuristics for this are simplistic, relying mostly on the size of the
critical pair. It is hard to do anything smarter because, with so many possible
critical pairs, each one must be judged quickly.
This story is typical for saturation-based theorem provers: very many possible
inferences, ranked using a simple metric. This is quite eﬀective, but sometimes
more intelligence is needed. One approach popularised by Otter [ 12] is to inject
human guidance about which shapes of terms or clauses are interesting. The
user speciﬁes a set of interesting shapes, and generated clauses that match these
shapes are preferred over ones that do not. This idea originated in the weighting
arXiv:2603.06849v1  [cs.LO]  6 Mar 2026
2 G. Axelrod et al.
strategy [14] and was later reﬁned by the resonance strategy [23,3,8] and hint
strategy [19,20]. All three strategies have been used to ﬁnd diﬃcult proofs.
In this paper we ﬁnd interesting term shapes automatically. We analyse failed
proof attempts and proofs of related conjectures to ﬁnd term shapes which occur
often, which we call abstractions. We have added support for abstractions to
Twee, and with the help of automatically generated abstractions we are able to
prove 12 rating-1 problems from the TPTP [ 18], as well as several other problems
that Twee previously could not solve (see Section 5). Our contributions are:
– A method for automatically generating abstractions from an unsuccessful
attempt to prove a conjecture (see Section 3.1). The idea is to pick out
interesting lemmas from the proof attempt, and ﬁnd patterns of terms that
occur repeatedly in the proofs of those lemmas. To ﬁnd the patterns we use
the tool Stitch [5], which attempts to compress a set of terms (here from
proofs) by introducing auxiliary function deﬁnitions as abbreviations.
– A method for generating abstractions from a corpus of successful proofs in
the same domain, again using Stitch (see Section 3.2). The hypothesis is
that patterns of terms that occur repeatedly in the proofs are often good
abstractions for other conjectures in the same domain. The aim here is to
create a methodology inspired by curriculum learning [ 4] for proving dif-
ﬁcult equational problems: ﬁrst prove some simpler problems in the same

=== cs_0310055_mace4_manual.pdf ===
arXiv:cs/0310055v1  [cs.SC]  28 Oct 2003
Argonne National Laboratory
9700 South Cass Avenue
Argonne, IL 60439
ANL/MCS-TM-264
Mace4 Reference Manual and Guide
by
William McCune
Mathematics and Computer Science Division
Technical Memorandum No. 264
August 2003
This work was supported by the Mathematical, Information, a nd Computational Sciences Divi-
sion subprogram of the Ofﬁce of Advanced Scientiﬁc Computin g Research, Ofﬁce of Science, U.S.
Department of Energy, under Contract W-31-109-ENG-38.
Argonne National Laboratory, with facilities in the states of Illinois and Idaho, is owned by the
United States Government and operated by The University of C hicago under the provisions of a
contract with the Department of Energy.
DISCLAIMER
This report was prepared as an account of work sponsored by anagency of the United States Govern-
ment. Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor The University of Chicago,
nor any of their employees or ofﬁcers, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal
liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, appara-
tus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its u se would not infringe privately-owned
rights. Reference herein to any speciﬁc commercial product , process, or service by trade name,
trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not necessari ly constitute or imply its endorsement,
recommendation, or favoring by the United States Governmen t or any agency thereof. The views
and opinions of document authors expressed herein do not nec essarily state or reﬂect those of the
United States Government or any agency thereof.
ii
